---

layout: post

title: Disco Linguam Latinam Prīmae

tags: 
- Latina

---

棍棒教育从来就不是独此一家、
别无分号的。你看，来自中世纪基督教
学校的教育名言，说明了在教育问题上
，大家都高明不到哪里去：）

**Aut disce aut discēde; 
manet sors tertia caedi.**

要么学习要么离开;此外命中注定受鞭笞。

- **Aut**
> conj.
> 
> or; either ... or; or else, or at least, or rather

- **disce**
> verb.
>
> second-person singular present
 active imperative of  **discō** 
> > **disco**
 (present infinitive 
**discere**, perfect active 
**didicī**, supine 
**discitum**); 
third conjugation

> > 1. I learn
> > 2. (drama) I study, 
practise
> > 
-o,-(i)s,-(i)t,-(i)mus,-(i)tis,-unt.

- **aut**

- **discēde**
> verb.
> second-person singular 
present active imperative of 
**discēdō**
> > **discēdō**
> > I leave, depart.
> > 
-ō,-(i)s,-(i)t,-(i)mus,-(i)tis, 
-unt

- **manet**
> third-person singular 
present active indicative of 
**maneō**
> From Proto-Indo-European 
*men- (“to stay, stand 
still”) (with mānsum 
influenced by mānsī), 
related to Persian ماندن‎ 
(mândan, “to remain”), 
Ancient Greek μένω (ménō, “I 
remain”).
> > Verb.
> >**maneō** (present 
infinitive 
**manēre**, perfect active 
**mānsī**, supine 
**mānsum**); 
second conjugation
> >- I stay, remain
> > > Paulisper mane!
> > >
> > > Stay a little.
> > - (transitive) I wait 
for, expect
> > - I last, endure
> > - I spend the night
> > > maneō manēs manet 
manēmus manētis manent
> > > 
-ō,-s,-t,-mus,-tis,-ent

- **sors**
> Noun
> sors f (genitive sortis); 
third declension
> - - lot, fate
> - - oracular response
> Third declension i-stem.

|Case|Singular|Plural|
|---|---|---|
|**Nominative**|sors|sortēs|
|Genitive|sortis|sortium|
|Dative|sortī|sortibus|
|Accusative|sortem|sortēs|
|Ablative|sorte|sortibus|
|Vocative|sors|sortēs|

- **tertia**
> ablative feminine singular 
of **tertius**
> > **tertius**
> > m (feminine tertia, 
neuter tertium); 
first/second declension
> > (ordinal) third, the 
ordinal number after 
secundus (“second”) and 
before quartus (“fourth”)
> > In poetical sense it is 
used for the Roman "Third 
World", that is the 
"Underworld", of Pluto
> > > tertia tertiae tertiae 
tertiam tertiā tertia

> > > tertiae tertiārum 
tertiīs tertiās tertiīs 
tertiae

- **caedi**
> dative singular of 
**caedēs**

> > **caedēs**

> > Noun

> > caedēs f (genitive 
caedis); 
third declension

> > - The act of cutting or 
lopping something off.

> > - The act of striking 
with the 
fist, a beating.

> > - (by extension) A 
murder, 
assassination, killing, 
slaughter, massacre, 
carnage.

> > - (metonymically) The 
corpses 
of the slain or murdered.

> > - (metonymically) The 
blood 
shed by murder, gore.

|Case|Singular|Plural|
|---|---|---|
|Nominative|caedēs|caedēs|
|Genitive|caedis|caedium|
|**Dative**|caedī|caedibus|
|Accusative|caedem|caedēs|
|Ablative|caede|caedibus|
|Vocative|caedēs|caedēs|

